3-5. 
Types of distributed control systems 
    a. Plant distributed control system (DCS): While the term DCS applies in general to any system in 
which controllers are distributed rather than centralized, in the power generation and petrochemical proc
ess industries it has come to refer to a specific type of control system able to execute complex analog 
process control algorithms at high speed, as well as provide routine monitoring, reporting and data log
ging functions. In most applications, the input and output modules of the system are distributed through
out the facility, but the control processors themselves are centrally located in proximity to the control 
room. These systems typically use proprietary hardware, software and communication protocols, requir
ing that both replacement parts and technical support be obtained from the original vendor.   
    b. Direct digital control (DDC): DDC systems are used in the commercial building heating, ventilation 
and air conditioning (HVAC) industry to monitor and maintain environmental conditions. They consist of 
local controllers connected to a network with a personal computer (PC) based central station which pro
vides monitoring, reporting, data storage and programming capabilities. The controllers are optimized for 
economical HVAC system control, which generally does not require fast execution speeds. Their hard
ware and control software are proprietary, with either proprietary or open protocols used for network 
communication. 
    c. Remote terminal unit (RTU) based SCADA: RTU-based systems are common in the electric, gas and 
water distribution industries where monitoring and control must take place across large geographical dis
tances. The RTUs were developed primarily to provide monitoring and control capability at unattended 
sites such as substations, metering stations, pump stations, and water towers. They communicate with a 
central station over telephone lines, fiber-optics, radio or microwave transmission. Monitored sites tend to 
be relatively small, with the RTU typically used mainly for monitoring and only limited control. Hard
ware and software are proprietary, with either proprietary or open protocols used for data transmission to 
the central station.  
    d. Programmable logic controller (PLC) based systems: PLCs, which are described in greater detail in 
the next section, can be networked together to share data as well as provide centralized monitoring and 
control capability. Control systems consisting of networked PLCs are supplanting both the plant DCS and 
the RTU-based systems in many industries. They were developed for factory automation and have tradi
tionally excelled at high speed discrete control, but have now been provided with analog control capabil
ity as well. Hardware for these systems is proprietary, but both control software and network communica
tion protocols are open, allowing system configuration, programming and technical support for a particu
lar manufacturer’s equipment to be obtained from many sources.  
3-4 
TM 5-601 
3-6. Programmable logic controllers 
The recommended controller for SCADA systems is the programmable logic controller (PLC).  PLCs are 
general-purpose microprocessor based controllers that provide logic, timing, counting, and analog control 
with network communications capability.   
a. PLCs are recommended for the following reasons: 
(1)  They were developed for the factory floor and have demonstrated high reliability and tolerance 
for heat, vibration, and electromagnetic interference. 
(2) Their widespread market penetration means that parts are readily available and programming 
and technical support services are available from a large number of control system integrators. 
(3) They provide high speed processing, which is important in generator and switchgear control 
applications. 
(4) They support hot standby and triple-redundant configurations for high reliability applications. 
b. A PLC consists of the required quantities of the following types of modules or cards, mounted on a 
common physical support and electrical interconnection structure known as a rack.  A typical PLC rack 
configuration is shown in figure 3-4. 
(1) Power supply: The power supply converts facility electrical distribution voltage, such as 120 
VAC or 125 VDC to signal level voltage used by the processor and other modules. 
(2) Processor: The processor module contains the microprocessor that performs control functions 
and computations, as well as the memory required to store the program. 
(3) Input/Output (I/O): These modules provide the means of connecting the processor to the field 
devices. 
(4) Communications: Communications modules are available for a wide range of industry-standard 
communication network connections.  These allow digital data transfer between PLCs and to other sys
tems within the facility.  Some PLCs have communications capability built-in to the processor, rather than 
using separate modules. 
(5) Communication Media and Protocols:  The most common communication media used are cop
per-wire, coaxial, fiber-optics, and wireless.  The most common “open” communication protocols are 
Ethernet, Ethernet/IP, and DeviceNet.  “Open” systems generally provide “plug and play” features in 
which the system software automatically recognizes and communicates to any compatible device that is 
connected to it.  Other widely accepted open protocols are Modbus, Profibus, and ControlNet. 
(6) Redundancy: Many PLCs are capable of being configured for redundant operation in which one 
processor backs up another.  This arrangement often requires the addition of a redundancy module, which 
provides status confirmation and control assertion between the processors.  In addition, signal wiring to 
redundant racks is an option.